Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Gregory Raelle. He's Professor
Emeritus in the Department of Earth Sciences at the
University of Oregon. His research has examined the fossil
record of soils uh through major events in earth
history. And he is the author of books like
Soils of the Past, an introduction to paleopathology. Yes,
there it is. And also Soil growing Tall. The
epic Saga of Life from Earth. So Doctor Rattle,
like, welcome to the show. It's a big pleasure
to everyone.
Well, thank you for considering me.
So I would like to start with, I guess
a very basic question also to introduce my audience
to this topic because to be honest, it's the
first time I have an interview for the show
on paleopathology. So, what is paleopathology?
Well, that's what I love about it. It isn't
widely known and um, it's been a field that
I've kind of been able to invent. I mean,
there were a few other people going actually way
back into the 17th century who tweaked to the
idea of a buried soil. But Papi is just
really the study of fossil soils, ancient soils that
gives us clues about ancient environments. Now, what some
people get confused about is, um, well, it has
nothing to do with um mummy's feet. So it's
not from the, the Greek pace petter for pedestrian
and it has nothing to do with Ancient Sumerian
child psychology either. It's not from the Greek Pace
pise for, from which we get pediatrician. It's from
the Greek word pedon, which means which means soil.
And the lovely thing about it is that soils
have a fossil record. You can compare ancient soils
with modern soils and they can tell us a
lot about how the world has changed through deep
time.
Yeah. You know, it's very interesting because I am
Portuguese and for a Portuguese person and I guess
people from other languages it makes more sense than
for English people that this would be somewhat related
to soil because in Tougue, the word for food
is pay. So it's closer to plog or the,
the initial part of the word pathology. So, yeah,
for us, for us it makes more uh immediate
sense.
Well, yes, it does differ in different languages. All
right. And then there are all sorts of um
problems in, in translating from different languages. Now, um
English seems to rule, I was just in France.
Um, AND um two decades ago, they, they just
don't speak English. But now even there English seems
to have taken over as a language of science.
Yeah. Correct. So, to get back on track. Uh
So could you tell us a little bit about
how you analyze fossil soils? Because I guess that
when, when people think about fossils, we tend to
think mostly about, I don't know, the remains of
animals and stuff like that, but the re uh,
but soil remnants or soil fossils, it's a little
bit uh weirder, I guess.
IT, it is quite a, quite a, quite a
bit weirder. And so my whole career has been
annoying my colleagues uh because uh Palao sos turn
out to be what other people have just regarded
as ordinary sedimentary beds or altered surfaces to lava
flows or things like that. So people have noticed
them because they really stick out uh from the
other surrounding rocks. Um The, the big problem for
most people is actually recognizing whether you've got a
soil or not. And that's a large part of
many of the papers that I write. Why do
I think it's a, it's a paleo oil. Well,
there's, there's three main things. Um The, the most
important of them is um root traces is something
if you, if there's root fossil, root traces and
they come down from a surface, well, that's a
paleo. So by definition, because something wants to grew
in it, um There's also this rather subtle concept
that many geologists have not been trained in and
that is the concept of soil structure. So modern
soils have a whole pattern of cracking that we
call pads and they're separated by modified surfaces, we
call Kans and they can be blocky or crumb
or um granular um geologists aren't trained to look
for that. And in fact, they're trained to overlook
it. Uh THAT'S a kind of a modification. And
finally, there's the soil horizons um instead of being
deposited one layer on top of another as is
normal in sedimentary sequences, soils actually develop from the
surface downwards. So there's an a horizon which is
a mix of organic and mineral, then there's a
modified bee horizon which may be rich in clay
or in, in carbonate or something else. Um And
these are diffuse horizons that are developing downwards as
cells develop sediments deposited. It's um it's a, it's
a mindset that men have been trained, not only
to not recognize but to even overlook because many
geologists pride themselves in getting beyond the surface, you
know, looking at, at the ancient rock, but these
things aren't preserved in, even in drill causes and
in and in quarries and in ordinary road cuts.
So it's, it's, it's, it's slightly a question of
me saying, oh, that's a paleo song and people
who studied the rocks before who didn't uh recognize
them getting kind of annoyed. Uh So in some
case, it's very annoying but uh that's it. Yeah,
I, I understand it. So, but tell us a
little bit about what factors play a role in
soil formation.
Well, this, this goes way back to the Koch
in 1883 and Hans Yani, one of my personal
heroes that there are basically five factors and we
have an acronym clocked and those are um climate,
um organisms, topographic relief um parent material, which is
what you start with to make a soil and
time. And we've known for a long time studying
modern soils, we can make kind of an experimental
design of space for time um or uh an
experimental design of um uh changing features for the
soil climate by keeping other things constant. We these
things that control the formation of modern soils which
people tease apart with studies of modern souls can
be applied to reconstruct uh the same sorts of
features in the fossil record. Um And it's been
really quite lovely to see that we have as
Paedos done a lot of work like this to
make these transfer functions, for example, to try and
find a mathematical relationship between the Menon precipitation and
the depth of the calc horizon in souls which
we can use for ancient uh soils. Uh We're
getting to the basis of soil science and this
is something that the the fossil people plyo seem
to be more interested in than, than, than modern
soil scientists who are more interested in um growing
more corn or um figuring out how to do
soils agriculturally. Uh And it's been a whole new
horizon for us. Uh It's been rather wonderful to
see people joining in with ever more sophisticated ways
of figuring out how to infer, for example, paleo
climate from an ancient soil.
And so one of the factors that you mentioned
there is organisms. So what do, what do we
know about how life co evolved with earth?
Um We know quite a bit as it turns
out and this has been the really fascinating part
of it to me is that on earth, uh
souls have developed with the development of plant life
in particular, uh starting out with uh simple things
like lichens, which are a consortium of fungus plus
uh an alga that live mostly on land. Uh
And the, the first evolution of lichens, for example,
was really a signal event in the evolution of
palaces because it increased the degree of weathering uh
by an order of magnitude. Um Then um we
see big changes in soils with the advent of
early nonvascular land plants and a huge change with
the evolution of trees because suddenly weathering and uh
facilitated by roots went much, much deeper. And then
finally, the evolution of of grasslands, each of these
things created a great carbon sink and have turned
out to regulate planetary temperatures by control of the
carbon cycle uh through time.
By the way, just to make it more clear,
I guess since we're talking about also to some
extent, the evolution of life here when we talk
about soils and paleo soils. Um Are we here
just referring to uh terrestrial soils or is it
that for example, the bottom of the ocean, we
could also call it the soil?
Oh, no, I, I would not call the bottom
of the ocean soil. I I sort of draw
the line there. Um There have been some of
European soil scientists in particular who figure that the,
the modification of a lake bottom is the soil.
I I do not, I draw the line there.
No, I I think it has to be sub
aal modification by definition. Uh REALLY, and that view
has been really reinforced when you consider detailed studies
of paleo. Also, we we do it by looking
at modifications in, in mineral content and in chemical
content down from the ancient surface. Um WE can
see that on land, we get a depletion of
calcium, magnesium, potassium and sodium uh from the surface
down on, on the in the bottom of the
ocean. It's just the reverse. We see an enrichment
of those things because uh the the so-called submarine
weathering, which I think is better called hemolysis is
a more technical term, is kind of the opposite
of sulf formation and it's the sulf formation, that's
of more interest because after all, we live on
land. Um AND we want to see how that's
changed through time. Uh AND how the evolution of
plants can, can, can save us. Um One of
the wonderful things about my work recently uh is
that there is a growing movement of carbon farming
and many modern farmers have looked at the fossil
record, for example of the evolution of grasslands, which
are the the basis for agricultural systems. And uh
using these carbon farming techniques to build soil carbon.
It's the only bright light really that I know
of uh in the uh idea of the greenhouse
effect this outdated destroyers because it's a cheap um
way of putting carbon back in the ground where
it belongs.
Mhm And when it comes to having a better
understanding of and studying questions related to, for example,
the co evolution of life and her, as we
mentioned earlier and also, I mean, not only related
to that but even having a better understanding of
how soils evolve and change over time. Do you
think that we can use barren planets as new
hypothesis?
Oh yeah. No, I love that. Um Yeah. In,
in my first CS of the past, I I
had a chapter on extraterrestrial soils. Uh I always
introduce it in lectures as soils in space which
is kind of like a take off on the
Muppets, you know, um I think that's super important.
Um ALTHOUGH some of my colleagues recommended I take
it out because they thought it was too theoretical.
But um there are and they, and they went
on a definition of soil as um something that
supports plant life, which is not the case, of
course, on any planetary bodies. Uh However, um, since
there are footprints on the moon and robots on
Mars, um, they do support life in a literal
sense now and that exploitation will increase uh in
the, in the future. Yes, it's a very important
null hypothesis. The striking thing that we've learned with
really ancient soils going back to 3.7 billion years.
The oldest one I've been able to uh study
in, in, in Greenland is they're very similar to
soils on mars of the same age of about
3.7 billion years old. So it's a super important
um null hypothesis. The Martian soils are very similar
to those on earth. They're clay and they have
salts in them. Um The lunar soils totally mind
blowing that it's just a kind of a, a
gardening by micro meteorite impact, basically, which is the
concept that um is so different from anything we
could conceive on one of the, the sulfur information
on Venus. This temperature is so hot that it's
pretty much like taking rocks and putting them in
a pot of kiln. It's a, it's a and
it happens quickly. So, um yes, these alternatives are,
are really important, I think and will become more
and more important as we explore the solar system
more and more. Um NOW that I'm retired and
I, I don't have access to all the lab
facilities that that I used to. My, my plan
is to do more and more on Martian Paleo.
Sos because the lovely thing about NASA uh is
that all the data is proprietary. Uh You get
all of it basically, it's public domain. You don't
have, nobody is keeping it from anybody. And I
was on the red team for the current um
mission to Jezero Crater and, and we insisted even
though it about tripled the budget that we have
to have sample return. And when that happens about
2030 or so, it's gonna be really amazing. The
organic molecules we'll be able to take from these
actual samples from Mars and which we know exactly
where they're from. Um That's gonna turn out to
be, I think super important for figuring out while
soils flourished on earth and died on Mars. It's
really interesting, you know, nothing is forever.
But for example, when it comes to studying, um
I don't know biomarkers, for example, that we might
find i in the soils of uh Mars, uh
isn't there at least some risk of uh contamination.
Of course, nobody yet, no human yet has stepped
foot on Mars itself, but still through the uh
technologies they send out there. Is there that risk
or not?
Yes. Um Well, that's the problem. Uh And this
is why uh people took so long to figure
out the biomarkers in the opportunity to rover samples.
Um BECAUSE there was always AAA real possibility that
they were looking of contamination from pump lubricants or
something like that. On the opportunity. Uh Rover, it
took actually two years at least to figure out
with successive analysis, whether it was indigenous to Mars
or whether it was a part of the um
uh a, a part of the actual Martian organic
matter content. The hope is that we know what
the, the the problem with those robots of course,
is they can only analyze fairly simple things like
pas poly psycho aromatic compounds and other relatively simple
things. The hope is with saddle return and why
we insisted on it uh is that we'll be
able to identify uh more complicated amino acids. Uh
And uh DNA RN A uh more complicated polymers,
um It's gonna be very hard to argue that
they're due to contamination, but we do have mechanisms
to look at how indigenous it is with different
autoclave uh sterilization techniques uh on the samples that
uh we can get. Uh AND this was tried,
of course with Martian meteorites as well. Uh So
it's, it's pretty clear that certain compounds are indigenous
to those Martian meteorites. Uh We hope to do
the same on uh Washington samples when they come
back. Um I am am not the person to
do that. Um I'm not really an organic chemist,
but we have some crackerjack people who know how
to do all of this sort of thing. And
I think it's gonna be very eliminating. Mhm. Maybe
it'll show there'll be nothing, you know, may, may,
maybe it'll turn out Mars is actually sterile as
it appears. Um, OR maybe it'll show that for
certain ages we have a strong signal and for
other ages and, and we're now getting Palys ranging
in age from about 3.7 to about 2.7 billion
years. Maybe we'll document the dying out of life
on Mars,
by the way, how far back uh in earth's
history? Can we go and analyze the paleo souls?
I mean, what are the oldest paleo souls analyzed
to it?
Oh, the oldest complete profiles that I've been able
to analyze uh 3.7 billion years old there from,
from Greenland. Um I think it, I think eventually
we'll find some back to four or so. But
um the lovely thing about considering extraterrestrial materials is
that uh I regard carbonaceous chondrites, a particular kind
of meteorite which is rich in organic matter and
in clay as the primeval paleo sos of the
galaxy. Now they're just bits of soils because they,
they're meteorites, they came down from this. But the
model that is generally accepted is that they formed
on the surface of planets very early on in
the formation of the solar system. And we have
radiometric gauges that limit their age between 200 million
years of the very beginning of the formation of
the solar system about 4.5 to 4.6 billion years,
uh old um different kinds of carbonaceous chondrites, you
can interpret as different kinds of soil horizon and,
and you can reconstruct what the soil formation was
like. So um there is a possibility of taking
the record back to 4.6 billion years at the
beginning of our, of our solar system to try
and understand what things were like in the beginning.
So there, there's another reason why we should start
getting interested in solar in space because it gives
us a perspective.
Mhm So when it comes to studying the evolution
of life on earth, uh if we want to
do it through or at least add that uh
source of evidence, let's say to the picture uh
if we want to add soils uh or sources
coming from soils, what are some of the biomarkers
or biosignatures of life that we can find uh
geologically?
Oh, all sorts of things. Um There's a whole
bunch of sophisticated organic compounds and um we're hoping
to find that they have a chirality that the
left and right handed molecules are 11 of, one
is preferred over the other as opposed to inorganic
um organic matter, which has um equal numbers of
left and right-handed uh molecules. But from my point
of view, I'm more interested in the big picture
of soil profile evolution and the big picture of
the degree of weathering of souls um weathering of
souls, the weathering reaction, which is basically carbonic acid
destroying feld bars to make clay. That is one
of the biggest carbon sinks. And so in, in,
in the long term, I've been interested to see
how major events in the evolution of life have
moderated carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. They've actually pulled
it out and they've saved us from another rather
tragic feature of our solar system. And that is
the increased brightness of the sun. The sun has
actually become brighter by about 30% over the last
4.6 billion years. Uh BECAUSE of stellar evolution and
eventually it'll, it'll, it'll get so bright and so
close, it'll fry life on earth as, as as
we know it. But uh the evolution of first
these lichens, these consortia of algae and, and, and
fungi um that increased carbon consumption by about an
order of magnitude. Uh AND then the evolution of
more sophisticated lichens in the EDI Aron did the
same. Uh THEN the evolution of early nonvascular land
plants did the same in another order of magnitude.
Uh And then the evolution of forest did the
same in another order of magnitude. The evolution of
grasslands uh was a carbon sink. Another order of
mag by about five orders of magnitude, we've pulled
carbon dioxide down to rather low levels over the
history of the earth. And this is kind of
salutary when you think about it. Um And this
is why the farmers love what I'm doing because
about 25% of the world's land area is farmed
and farmers are basically keepers of the thermostat. Uh
They can use techniques which build soil carbon by
keeping ground cover, by conto carping, by rotational grazing.
Uh These various techniques of carbon farming are becoming
more and more popular and uh could save us
from a future greenhouse crisis.
So when it comes to the evolution of life
on earth, of course, the the plant kingdom is
very much intimately tied to the soil. Uh What
are some of the most significant moments in plant
evolution that we can study through paleo?
Yeah, they uh so the the major events and
the evolution of life and, and so particularly plant
life. Uh THE ice ages, it's been kind of
interesting that earth has flirted with ice ages including
some really serious ones. Um One of the first
ice ages was uh around about 2.4 billion years
ago. And that was caused by the chilling effect
of carbon sequestration, increased weathering and also carbon that
went into the first primitive kinds of lichens, which
are um what we call endocytic lichens like a
thing called geo ciron. Uh Then again, another ice
age, the one that's called snowball earth was another
kind of a lichen more like modern lichens in
being ecto symbiotic. It um created snowball earth when
the earth was really as cold as it ever
got, but not quite, I've still been able to
find some paleo sos with cracks and sand wedges
and stone stripes like you'd find in the dry
valleys of Antarctica and tropical regions. Um So that
was, had a bit a chilling effect. Another ice
age was uh in the late old division about
440 million years ago, that was associated with the
evolution of nonvascular land plants. And then the big
ice age of the carboniferous and permian uh was
caused by the evolution of trees. Uh And my
case which has been taken to heart by farmers
especially is that the reason why we had an
ice age in the last 2 million years is
because of the rise of grassland ecosystems of grasses
and grazers acting in concert to put the carbon
underground.
Mhm So we've been talking a lot about the
life and the co evolution of life and soils
on earth. Uh I would like to ask you
now are paleo soils. Uh SOMETHING that we can
also use to study climate change over the course
of earth's history.
Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. Yes, we can get uh all
the climate factors from different features of cells. Um
uh Precipitation, for example, we can get that from
the depth to carbonate in soils. We can get
it from chemical changes in soils, um seasonality, we
can get from the spread of carbonate nodules in
soils. Um We can also calculate from soil is
stabilized topic data. The amount of carbon dioxide in
the atmosphere which is very, very interesting. And uh
for my next trick I'm planning on using the
um carbon isotopic measurements of paleo sos to get
a global mean paleo temperature going back 3.7 billion
years. That's because we know that carbon dioxide is
mixed in the air on a scale of decades.
Basically, um the uh the problem with using paleo
for palely, of course, it's a local paleo climate.
So it's the amount of rain in a particular
spot and that can vary a lot. But if
we have the carbon dioxide content of any paleo,
so on earth, we know that that reflects the
carbon dioxide content of the whole planet. And we
have a fixed relationship between carbon dioxide of the
whole planet and the um temperature of the whole
planet. So this is gonna give us an interesting
baseline on um evolution through time and we're very
concerned about that. Of course, I I mean, I
just read yesterday that the ocean temperature in Florida
hit 100 and one °F um which is um
unprecedented, unprecedented and it's gonna get harder and harder
understanding these things in deep time is gonna be
an important baseline.
So since you're mentioning that the study of uh
ancient climate change through Paleo, sos can also inform
us uh about what we are experiencing now.
Yes, exactly, exactly. Um The interesting thing about many
of the big mass extinctions, for example, is that
they occurred at a time of dramatic increase in
carbon dioxide. Now, it's fashionable to say that in
deep time, we don't have good records of the
time of these massive carbon dioxide increases. But uh
that's just not true. Uh We can see from
paleo sos and from records in valve shells, that
means in shells that were deposited in lakes on
an annual basis that some of the big increases
in coming outside, like the permian Triassic transition. Well
within decades, like the current anthropogenic increase in carbon
dioxide. And interestingly what happened in those examples is
that really strongly carbon consuming ecosystems spread like tropical
soil spread from the equator closer to the poles,
uh even into fairly high latitudes and uh grasslands
spread into deserts. Uh These were able to pull
down carbon dioxide over time scales of about a
million years or or or less. So the time
scales are actually comparable and we're starting to get
the means now uh particularly with uh supercomputers of
uh modeling that carbon sequestration and considering how we
can emulate that for future.
Mhm So I asked you about climate change. What
about paleo environments? Can we get a better picture
of what particular environments on earth might have looked
like in the past by studying Paleo Sos?
Oh Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They um the interesting thing
about sequences of uh of paleo cells is that
we often get a very similar pattern from one
set of rocks to another. It it usually in
a, in a, a sequence deposit by rivers. For
example, there are usually weakly developed soils that are
associated with Palia channels which represent the ancient streams.
And then there's some moderately developed paly sos that
represent levies. And then there's some well-developed ones that
represent floodplains. And then there are some super well-developed
ones that represent uplands where there's been very little
deposition to interrupt soil formation. Uh Those patterns have
changed through time. Uh And the the the behavior
of rivers have changed through time. So we went
from braided streams with multiple river courses to streams
that had a more meandering uh pattern. Um We
can get a very nice idea of changes of,
of environment. My most recent paper on snowball earth,
this this time 700 million years ago, when some
people think the whole earth was basically covered in,
in ice have demonstrated that there were at least
a few patches that were not covered in ice.
There were some patches even near the equator that
were like the dry valleys of Antarctica. Uh And
um I've flown over the dry valleys of Antarctica
during my studies of um perme paleo salts there.
Uh It's quite remarkable the similarity in these landscapes
you can see from a helicopter and also from
from the field that there are these frost cracking
patterns and these stone straps and other features. Um
And here they are 700 million years old in,
in snowball and this turns out to be important
because many people have wondered if the whole earth
was covered in ice. How did life survive that?
Well, on land, on the, in the sea? Pretty
hopeless. You know. Um, PHOTOSYNTHESIS would shut down. Everything
was crunched away. Uh, BUT on land, no problem.
Mhm. Uh, BY the way, here, when it comes
to, uh, getting a better picture of, uh, a
particular paleo environment, we're not just talking about uh
let's say, topography, geography, but also about vegetation, right?
We can also learn more about that.
Yes, of course. Yes. Yes. Yes, we can see,
we see patterns in the vegetation um from the
weakly developed soils. They commonly actually preserve fossil leaves
and other things and they form a sort of
early successional kind of vegetation through to the full
successional forest that's on, that's on the floodplain. And
we can find really nice examples of modern environments
that are similar to those in the past. Modern,
what I like to call Souls Skypes that are
similar to those in, in the past. Yeah, for
me, it's kind of mind expanding to take a
view of the earth from a sort of a
worm's eye view from, from soils. Uh It was
kind of amazing to me when I discovered soil.
I started out as a paleo botanist. So, vegetation
and the different kinds of plants in the past
are still of great interest to me, but I
soon discovered that not only can you travel with
an eye to botany and, and learn about ecology
and ecological succession and ecological designation. You can also
travel with an eye for soil, for, for soil
fertility, for the different soil types in a particular
um region. Uh This is a view that soil
scientists have cultivated for many years, but I think
pale really brings it into focus. Why you would
want to think about things in that way? Mhm
So let me just ask you about one last
topic and I guess that the audience will be
very interested in hearing about this. So you've also
done work on the effects of soil on the
taste of wine. So could you
Absolutely. No, no, no. I think I think the
best way of explaining this is with the song
Will Amet Valley Wine from Pinot Noir. I derive
some taste below when Ph of the wine is
high. So Ph was low, the less acidic wine
will spoil given time but fruit forward is so
sublime. In contrast, are the grapes well fed with
acid when the vines are stressed, they seem to
be impressed to do their very best to foster
every mammal's need to scatter seed.
Oh my God. I have, I have to tell
you that this is the first on the
shows. I actually wrote the lyrics to that. Driving
through Casablanca in search of Rick's Spa. But the
what I started this idea of looking at um,
wine terroir, uh with my wife and, and we
did what, everybody, where we went, where everyone went,
went for and took a wine tour of the
Will Valley, which is our local, um, viticultural area.
And, uh, here I am, you know, sort of
balding, white haired and, um, with a notebook. Um,
YEAH, I have these, these fill notebooks, you know,
uh taking notes while I'm drinking wine and of
course, the venters thought, oh, this is someone, you
know, um we'll give him more and we, and
we ended up getting such a hangover. I decided
that was not the way to do it. But
what so, but what I discovered when I inquired
of the ventner was that these days they all
have a wine sheet. So for every wine that
they produce, they, they give you where it came
from, uh they tell you whether it's blended, I
threw all those out. Um But in many cases,
they give you the grape and they give you
an exact location and we can correlate that with
the uh individual soil type. And what I found
was that there was an inverse relationship between soil
ph uh and uh one ph um which is
a very important part of the taste of wine.
Uh If, if it's really acidic, it, it, it,
it has an astringency um if it's uh less
acidic and, and we're talking about a range from
3 to 4 or so which is all on
the acid side. Uh Then, then, then you can
have more of a bouquet. You can have more
of a fruity flavor, but it doesn't last as
long because it doesn't uh preserve so well. Uh
So after all this criticism of the soils, um
not going through to, we actually found something um
which was statistically um robust. Now, that's not to
say that the um highly acidic soils which give
um the most interesting wines because the, the, the
from the grapes point of view, the nutrients are
so low that it wants to get out of
there. And so it, it's, it's making grapes that
are gonna be dispersed that are more tempting, more
delicious. Um That's not to say that it's always,
that's, those are always the most esteemed vintages uh
by wine connoisseurs. So we also ran a correlation
between the ones that are most highly ranked uh
and the amount of rainfall in October, which is
the time of ripening of the grapes. And we
found that if there was no rain in October,
those were the best wines by far. So it's,
it's not as if ph is, is the only
thing. Um THE really esteemed ones, but I was
just in France. Um Well, last week and looking
at Beaujolais, um which is a, a AAA wine
district that upholds this tradition quite well in um
the Valley, we have um Pinot Noirs that are
like those of burgundy, but Beaujolais is a, is
a wine that grows on granitic salts that is
super low in nutrients. And I think it's because
there's this paleo o on the granites uh that
just really sucked out the nutrients uh for them.
And the Beaujolais wines are best and most uh
fruity and most interesting early on the, the bole
Nove. Uh AND they, they, they demonstrate that when
the vines are stressed, they seem to be impressed
to really um develop an interesting flavor uh spectrum.
But they don't last. Of course, you can't put
them down for a long, a long time. They're
acidic enough that bacterial infection and observation will eventually
destroy them.
Mhm A and I would imagine that in this
particular case, we are talking about the effects of
soil on grapes that are used to produce wine,
but this would also apply to other aspects of
agriculture,
correct? Oh, yes. Well, the, the French concept of
terra extends to virtually everything, uh cheeses, um fruits,
um uh preserves pickles, all sorts of uh things.
Yes and yes, indeed. It, the idea uh in,
in, in Italy also not only wine but cheese.
Uh uh PROSCIUTTO preserved meats. Um These are all
linked to particular kinds of soils and it's, it's
really kind of wonderful to explore those different tastes
and how they relate to particular regions. Uh I
think, I think wine, uh cheese and preserved meat,
tourism is going to be really a big thing
as people become a lot more sophisticated about food
and shy away from mass production. There's a Velveeta
culture that America has uh foisted upon the world.
Yeah. Uh You know, uh when I introduced the
question about the taste of wine, I was laughing
a little bit because also, as you probably are
aware here in Portugal, we have one of the
most famous wines in the world. The Porto wine.
So,
absolutely, yes. Yes. Yes. Um Yes, the Portuguese and
the um Northern Spanish wines are quite uh famous
and uh the international Terroir Congress, I think it
was of 2016 was there. And I was really
sorry, I couldn't make it. That Congress, by the
way is absolutely fantastic. I presented my work and,
and, and sang my song uh when it was
in Linfield, which is here in, in Oregon. And
uh it's a, it was a four day meeting
and we all lived together in dorms. Uh All
the food was prepared for us and we had
wine pairing lunch. Um And then after morning sessions,
we all hopped on a bus and went to
a vineyard and looked at soil profiles and then
we had a wine pairing dinner, of course with
often a live band and dancing. Um uh I'd,
I'd, I'd, I'd love to take my wife to
another one of those. It was such a blast.
Oh, yeah. The most scientific conferences. I, yeah,
the Doro region here in where you find the
best grapes, the best vineyards is really beautiful. So,
yes, yes, yes. The other aspect of um that
the, that the French emphasize and I think is
really important is the thousands of years of viticultural
experience um in those regions. Um And uh the,
it, it, it goes back at least to, to
Roman Times. I, I was in Lyon last week
and I learned that um the goals of Lyon,
which was the lun on the capital of Roman
Gaul. They were so keen on the first Italian
wines that came through that and they had no
means to buy it except to sell slaves. I
mean, whoa, that is pretty, that is a pretty
serious investment in wine. And of course, they quickly
learned how to make it themselves. And the same
was true for Hispania uh which was then a
part of the Roman Empire once they got a
taste for Italian wines and, and then they found
their own great varieties that work best for them.
Um It was, it was all over. And although
modern great techniques like even the lamb ones have
won awards in in French competitions, even though modern
techniques have improved dramatically, that expertise which goes back
thousands of years is, is a no small part
of the tar effect.
Yeah, I mean, definitely wine is one of the
biggest aspects of Portuguese culinary culture.
That's true. That's true. No, the tradition of Tapas
is taking over the world as well.
Well, well, that, that's more, that's more from Spain.
It is more from Spain, although we also have
them here, but it's more from the Spanish origin.
Yes, I have, I have friends in Portugal who
have really become addicted to Tapas with one. Yes.
Ok. So Doctor Rae uh I'm leaving links in
the description box of this interview to your books.
Is there anything any place on the internet that
you would like to mention where people can find
you or?
Oh, yeah, my, my name Metallic is um is
so unique. Um I love it. Um So I
Google, super. Well, you'll find me. Um I have
a, a Wikipedia page and I have a personal
blog page and um I come up very easily
and Google come up. Um If you have the
name, the rest will follow and let's connect Google
World.
Ok. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show and it's been
really fun to talk to you.
Yes. Fantastic. Well done. Thank you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please do not
forget to like it, share, comment and subscribe. And
if you like more generally what I'm doing, please
consider support the show on Patreon or paypal. You
have all of the links in the description of
this interview. This show is brought to you by
en Lights learning and development done differently. Check their
website at alights.com. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters per Larson Jerry Mueller and Frederick Sunda
Bernards O of Election and Visor Adam Castle Matthew
Whit Whitting Bear. No wolf, Tim Hollis, Eric, Alania,
John Connors, Philip Forrest Connelly, Robert Winde Ruin. Nai
Z Mark Ns Colin Holbrook, Simon Columbus, Phil. Kor
Michael Stormer Samuel Andreev for the S Alexander Dan
Bauer, Fergal Ken Hall, her OG Michel, Jonathan lebron
Jars and the Samuel Eric Heins, Mark Smith, Jan
We Amal Sran David Sloan Wilson Yasa, Des Roma
Roach die Jannik Punter, Da Man, Charlotte Bli Nicole
Barbar W and P A naw guy Madison, Gary
GH. Some of the Adrian Yin Nick Golden Paul
talent in JU Bar was Julian Price Edward Hall,
Eden Bronner, Douglas Fry Franca Bertolotti. Gabriel Pan Cortez,
Lelis Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sonny Smith, John
Wiesman, Martin Aland, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul George
Arnold Luke Lo A Georges the offense, Chris Williamson,
Peter Oren David Williams the Costa Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw and Murray Martinez Chevalier, Bangalore atheists
Larry Daley Junior Holt Eric B. Starry Michael Bailey
then Sperber Robert Grassy Rough the RP MD, Ior
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radix, Mark Campbell, Richard
Bowen Thomas, the Dubner, Luke Ni and Greece story,
Manuel Oliveira, Kimberly Johnson and Benjamin Gilbert. A special
thanks to my producers is our web. Gem Frank
Luca Stefi Tom Weam Bernard Ni Ortiz Dixon Benedict
Mueller Vege, Gli Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin.
John Carlo Montenegro, Robert Louis and Al Nick Ortiz.
And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Serge Adrian
and Bogdan Kut. Thank you for all.